### Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) for Deep Learning Neural NetworksThe rectified linear activation function is a piecewise linear function that will output the input directly if is positive, otherwise, it will output zero. It has become the default activation function for many types of neural networks because a model that uses it is easier to train and often achieves better performance.#### Limitations of Sigmoid and Tanh Activation FunctionsA neural network is comprised of layers of nodes and learns to map examples of inputs to outputs.For a given node, the inputs are multiplied by the weights in a node and summed together. This value is referred to as the summed activation of the node. The summed activation is then transformed via an activation function and defines the specific output or “activation” of the node.The simplest activation function is referred to as the linear activation, where no transform is applied at all. A network comprised of only linear activation functions is very easy to train, but cannot learn complex mapping functions. Linear activation functions are still used in the output layer for networks that predict a quantity (e.g. regression problems).Nonlinear activation functions are preferred as they allow the nodes to learn more complex structures in the data. Traditionally, two widely used nonlinear activation functions are the sigmoid and hyperbolic tangent activation functions.The sigmoid activation function, also called the logistic function, is traditionally a very popular activation function for neural networks. The input to the function is transformed into a value between 0.0 and 1.0. Inputs that are much larger than 1.0 are transformed to the value 1.0, similarly, values much smaller than 0.0 are snapped to 0.0. The shape of the function for all possible inputs is an S-shape from zero up through 0.5 to 1.0. For a long time, through the early 1990s, it was the default activation used on neural networks.The hyperbolic tangent function, or tanh for short, is a similar shaped nonlinear activation function that outputs values between -1.0 and 1.0. In the later 1990s and through the 2000s, the tanh function was preferred over the sigmoid activation function as models that used it were easier to train and often had better predictive performance.… the hyperbolic tangent activation function typically performs better than the logistic sigmoid.— Page 195, Deep Learning, 2016.A general problem with both the sigmoid and tanh functions is that they saturate. This means that large values snap to 1.0 and small values snap to -1 or 0 for tanh and sigmoid respectively. Further, the functions are only really sensitive to changes around their mid-point of their input, such as 0.5 for sigmoid and 0.0 for tanh.The limited sensitivity and saturation of the function happen regardless of whether the summed activation from the node provided as input contains useful information or not. Once saturated, it becomes challenging for the learning algorithm to continue to adapt the weights to improve the performance of the model.… sigmoidal units saturate across most of their domain—they saturate to a high value when z is very positive, saturate to a low value when z is very negative, and are only strongly sensitive to their input when z is near 0.— Page 195, Deep Learning, 2016.Finally, as the capability of hardware increased through GPUs’ very deep neural networks using sigmoid and tanh activation functions could not easily be trained.Layers deep in large networks using these nonlinear activation functions fail to receive useful gradient information. Error is back propagated through the network and used to update the weights. The amount of error decreases dramatically with each additional layer through which it is propagated, given the derivative of the chosen activation function. This is called the vanishing gradient problem and prevents deep (multi-layered) networks from learning effectively.